JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It is my responsibility as
commander in chief
not to stand by, but to make
sure that we
send a clear signal to the
Taliban and others.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Calling the
action an important
milestone for peace, President
Obama confirms
a U.S. drone strike kills the
Afghan Taliban
leader -- what this means for
the fight against
the terror group.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Monday:
As candidates head West, our
Politics Monday
team breaks down the latest in
the race for
the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, during
President Obama's
trip to Vietnam, we take a look
at the generation
who moved back after escaping
the atrocities
of war with their parents.
QUYNH PHAM, Art Gallery Owner:
My mother,
who I am very close to, she
actually flat-out
told me that I'm no longer her
daughter if
I come back to Vietnam.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: A historic
moment in Hanoi
today. The United States
formally dropped
its prohibition on selling
weapons to Vietnam.
It highlighted the dramatic
turnaround in
relations between the two former
enemies.
John Yang has our report.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
This change will ensure that
Vietnam has access
to the equipment that it needs
to defend itself
and removes a lingering vestige
of the Cold
War.
JOHN YANG: In Hanoi, President
Obama officially
ended the more-than-four-decades
old arms
embargo.
BARACK OBAMA: At this stage,
both sides have
established a level of trust and
cooperation,
including between our
militaries, that is
reflective of common interests
and mutual
respect.
JOHN YANG: That mutual respect
was on full
display during the first of Mr.
Obama's three
days in Vietnam. He was greeted
at the presidential
palace by a military honor
guard. At night,
hundreds of people lined the
streets to catch
a glimpse of the president as he
left a noodle
shop.
The warming extends to commerce,
too: American
and Vietnamese companies signed
deals worth
$16 billion. Lifting the arms
embargo reflects
growing U.S. concerns about
China's military
buildup and territorial
ambitions in the South
China Sea. China's efforts to
exert more naval
control over shipping lanes in
the sea is
troubling to both the United
States and Vietnam.
While acknowledging the shared
concerns, Mr.
Obama said ending the embargo
was about warming
relations between two former
foes.
BARACK OBAMA: The decision to
lift the ban
wasn't based on China or any
other considerations.
It was based on our desire to
complete what
has been a lengthy process of
moving towards
normalization with Vietnam.
JOHN YANG: China's immediate
response was
muted, but human rights groups
said Vietnam
was getting a reward it didn't
deserve. They
have long criticized Vietnam's
communist regime
for repressing dissidents. Even
as he praised
the two nations' reconciliation,
President
Obama underscored differences
over democracy
and human rights. Tomorrow, he
meets with
Vietnamese dissidents.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will focus
on the phenomenon
of Vietnamese Americans
returning home later
in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Iraq,
government troops
have launched a much-anticipated
offensive
to retake Fallujah from Islamic
State fighters.
The city about 40 miles west of
Baghdad has
been under the militant group's
control since
January 2014. Today, Iraqi
forces pushed their
way into nearby farming areas.
They were backed
by U.S. coalition airstrikes and
paramilitary
troops.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Islamic State
bombings in
Syria killed nearly 150 people
today and wounded
at least 200 more. Five suicide
attackers
and two car bombs hit government
strongholds
in the coastal cities of Jableh
and Tartus.
That area is home to Russian
military bases.
ISIS also claimed responsibility
for twin
bombings in Yemen that killed at
least 45
people there. The victims had
gathered at
army recruiting centers in Aden.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The leader of an
anti-immigrant
party in Austria came within a
whisker today
of being elected president. His
support showcased
rising opposition both to
migrants and to
the European Union.
James Mates of Independent
Television News
reports.
JAMES MATES: Austria held its
breath. Much
of Europe held its breath. The
country interior
minister walked solemnly to the
podium to
declare whether the far right
had made the
biggest electoral breakthrough
since World
War II.
By just 31,000 votes out of 4.5
million, Norbert
Hofer of the Freedom Party had
been kept out
of the presidential palace,
conceding defeat
on his Facebook page, but
promising supporters
he will be back. The country's
new president
is the mild-mannered economics
Professor Alexander
van der Bellen backed originally
by the Greens,
but then by everybody as they
tried to keep
the far right out.
So Europe will breathe a sigh of
relief, but
cannot ignore the biggest lesson
here, the
collapse of the center and the
rise of the
extremes of both left and right.
Centrist
politicians who face wipeout
point out it's
far from just an Austrian
problem.
Should the rest of Europe be
worried about
this?
JAN KRAINER, Social Democrat
M.P.: I think
the entire Europe should worry
about what
is going on in the entire
Europe, without
specifically looking into in one
country.
It's not that what is going on
in Austria
is so much different from what
is going on
in very many other European
countries.
JAMES MATES: At a party in a
Vienna beer garden
last night, Norbert Hofer was
prematurely
celebrating victory, but 49.7
percent of the
vote is hardly a defeat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Center-left
parties have dominated
Austrian politics since World
War II, but
they were eliminated in last
month's first
round of voting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country: The
U.S. Supreme Court struck down
the murder
conviction for a death row
inmate in Georgia
because of racial bias in
picking his jury.
Timothy Foster was convicted in
1987 of murdering
an elderly white woman. The high
court ruled
7-1 that state prosecutors
violated the Constitution
when they excluded blacks from
his jury. Foster
is now eligible for a new trial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A Baltimore
policeman was acquitted
today in the death of Freddie
Gray, an incident
that sparked riots in the city
last year.
A judge found officer Edward
Nero had little
to do with Gray's arrest and
death in custody.
Nero still faces an internal
police investigation.
In all, six officers were
charged in the case.
The trial of the first ended in
a hung jury.
We will examine the verdict and
its implications
later in the program.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A major
takeover bid today
in the farm chemicals industry.
Germany's
Bayer offered to buy Monsanto
for $62 billion.
The Saint Louis seed giant
specializes in
crop seeds and the widely used
weed killer
Roundup. Any deal would be
subject to a federal
regulatory review of how it
affects farmers
and consumers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street, a
quiet day.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost eight
points today to close below
17493. The Nasdaq
fell three points and the S&P
500 slipped
four.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And swarms of
insects are
now threatening the Taj Mahal in
India. Millions
of flies are breeding in a
polluted river
that's nearby, and they're
leaving behind
green and black waste. That's
forced crews
to scrub the 17th century
monument daily.
Officials warn all that
scrubbing will damage
the building's famed marble
inlay work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And still to come
on the "NewsHour":
the Taliban's top leader taken
out in Pakistan;
a shift to the general election,
even as Bernie
Sanders campaigns in California;
what an acquittal
means for a Baltimore police
officer in the
death of Freddie Gray; and much
more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The man who
led the Afghan
Taliban for the past year was
killed in a
U.S. operation over the weekend.
The group
had been gaining ground and
waging a bloody
war against the Afghan
government.
So, what's next for the Taliban,
and the countries
who fight it?
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: Smoldering
wreckage on a
Pakistani roadside was all that
remained of
the Taliban commander's vehicle
hours after
he died in it Saturday.
Today, in Vietnam, President
Obama officially
announced a U.S. drone strike
killed Mullah
Akhtar Mohammad Mansour.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It has been confirmed that he is
dead. And
he as an individual who, as head
of the Taliban,
was specifically targeting U.S.
personnel
and troops inside of
Afghanistan.
MARGARET WARNER: Mullah Mansour
took over
the Afghan Taliban last summer,
after the
group finally announced that
longtime leader
Mullah Omar had died in 2013.
The new leader
faced down rivals, in part by
rejecting Afghan-
and U.S.-backed peace talks.
Under his direction, Taliban
forces briefly
seized the Northern Afghan city
of Kunduz
last September, and carried out
a bloody assault
in Kabul itself in April,
killing 64.
Word of his death was welcomed
by Afghan chief
executive Abdullah Abdullah:
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH, Afghan Chief
Executive
(through translator): He was in
charge of
all terrorist attacks in
Afghanistan, and
he had direct contact with other
terrorist
networks. This will bring a big
change in
the Taliban condition. His death
is a blow
to their abilities in carrying
out terrorist
attacks against the Afghan
people.
MARGARET WARNER: Afghan
President Ashraf Ghani
signaled that the Taliban
leader's death could
also open the door to renewed
peace talks.
The drone strike that killed
Mansour was the
first by the U.S. inside
Baluchistan, in Southwestern
Pakistan. It's long been a
Taliban stronghold.
In London yesterday, Pakistan's
Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif condemned the
attack, saying
the U.S. gave no advance
warning.
NAWAZ SHARIF, Pakistani Prime
Minister (through
translator): We are protesting
strongly. This
is a violation of the
sovereignty of Pakistan.
MARGARET WARNER: But
Afghanistan's government
accuses the Pakistanis of
harboring a veritable
who's-who of most wanted
terrorists.
GEN. DAWLAT WAZIRI, Afghan
Defense Ministry
(through translator): The
Haqqani Network
is in Pakistan. Mullah Omar and
Osama bin
Laden were in Pakistan, and now
Mullah Mansour
was killed in Pakistan's
Baluchistan. It would
be better if Pakistan cooperated
with Afghanistan
and didn't give shelter to these
people who
are continuing the war in
Afghanistan.
MARGARET WARNER: Pakistani
authorities say
a passport found near the drone
strike wreckage
shows Mansour had just returned
from Iran.
Officials there denied the
claim.
Meanwhile, the already-fractured
Taliban is
scrambling to close ranks.
Senior leaders
met today, and speculation over
a successor
centers on Mansour's deputy,
Sirajuddin Haqqani,
a warlord seen as even more
brutal than Mansour.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We take a
closer look at
what this means for Afghanistan
moving forward
with Riaz Mohammad Khan, a
former Pakistani
diplomat who also served as that
country's
foreign minister, and Barnett
Rubin. He was
a senior adviser at the U.S.
State Department
from 2009 to 2013.
Riaz Khan, I want to start with
you. Who was
Mullah Mansour? What do we know
about him?
RIAZ MOHAMMAD KHAN, Former
Pakistani Ambassador:
Well, Mullah Mansour was an
important leader
under Mullah Omar.
And after a long struggle, he
was being recognized
as the leader of the Afghan
Taliban. Of course,
now he's dead. And this is going
to lead to
another round of divisive
struggling for leadership
within the Taliban.
But apart from that, I think it
will be a
setback to the so-called quartet
process.
Secondly, I think we can
anticipate a spike
in violence, because, knowing
the character
of the Afghan Taliban, some of
the factions,
they would want to avenge this.
And there
may be some violence within
Afghanistan or
in Pakistan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Barnett Rubin,
what about
the significant of this
happening in Baluchistan?
BARNETT RUBIN, Director, Center
on International
Cooperation, New York
University: Well, first,
it's important to recognize that
this was
-- the decision to undertake
this act was
inspired by the need to protect
American soldiers,
not by a strategic decision
about the course
of the Afghan war or
Afghanistan.
What is important about striking
Baluchistan
is, Baluchistan is the province
in Pakistan
where the headquarters of the
Afghan Taliban
is located, primarily in the
city of Quetta.
And we have known that for a
very long time.
But the United States used
drones. Mostly,
it was the CIA using drones
against terrorists
with global reach, like al-Qaida
or those
closely connected to al-Qaida,
in the tribal
areas of Pakistan. And they had
agreed with
the military of Pakistan there
were certain
areas where they could use those
drone strikes.
Now, this strike was carried out
by the United
States special forces in
Afghanistan, which
means it's not part of the CIA's
anti-terrorism
campaign. It's part of the war
in Afghanistan.
So they have extended the
territory of the
war of Afghanistan into
Baluchistan, which
also puts Pakistan in a
deservedly very difficult
position, because it shows that
the leader
of the Taliban was driving a
taxi across Baluchistan
without apparently being
concerned about his
security, which shows that the
top leadership
of the Taliban operates with
impunity in Pakistan,
which we all knew, of course,
and means that
their complaints about violating
their sovereignty
are null and void, because they
are constantly
violating the sovereignty of
Afghanistan by
sponsoring military incursions
and terrorist
acts have.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Riaz Khan,
what about the
idea that there is a level of
complicity?
Mullah Mansour also had a fake
Pakistani passport.
What is the relationship between
the intelligence
agencies in Pakistan and what
they do they
know and what are they willing
to tolerate
with leadership of the Taliban?
RIAZ MOHAMMAD KHAN: Well, first,
I would like
to say that this shows -- this
incident shows,
apart from the question of
sovereignty, that
the United States didn't trust
Pakistan.
There is no confidence. There is
no transparency,
which is necessary for
cooperation in such
matters. But as far as
complicity is concerned,
the Taliban, many -- most of the
Taliban,
they have come to Pakistan --
had come to
Pakistan after the American
intervention.
And many of them have got
passports.
It wouldn't be surprising if he
also can use
Pakistani passport. There are
five million
Afghan refugees in Pakistan. And
many of them,
they have become part of the
Pakistani society.
But there is this disconnect
between Pakistan
and the United States in terms
of confidence
which is necessary.
Secondly, I should say that a
lot of blame
is placed on Pakistan ISI,
others, et cetera,
for the troubles in Afghanistan.
But there
is -- it ignores the fact of
failure policy;
it ignores the fact of error of
judgment,
like, for example, Iraq.
There is a great deal of mess
over there.
Now, there is no ISI and
Pakistan over there.
It had been a failure of policy.
Similarly
here, the failure of policy goes
even back
to the voting process, where the
Taliban,
reconcilable Taliban, should
have been brought
into the fold of the voting
process, but that
didn't happen.
There have been other mistakes,
like, for
example, the control of Kabul
was left to
the Northern Alliance forces,
which were mostly
non-Pashtun. That rankled with
the Pashtun.
And that helped, in fact, the
Taliban revive
themselves later on.
And that kind of imbalance even
continues
today in the Afghan national
army. And that
is the reason why it is not that
effective
in the Pashtun-dominated areas
of Afghanistan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Barnett Rubin,
as Mr. Khan
just mentioned, what about the
diplomatic
and political implications about
the fact
that there wasn't any sort of a
signal given,
any permission asked before this
strike was
launched, the level of distrust
that exists
between these two countries?
BARNETT RUBIN: Well, first, I
will just say,
I agree with my friend Riaz
Mohammad Khan
that there were a lot of policy
mistakes by
the United States, in particular
missing early
opportunities to include the
Taliban in the
setup Afghanistan, so that they
would have
not fled to Pakistan.
Now, your question was, if you
can repeat
it?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sorry.
I was just asking, what about
the level of
distrust between these two
countries?
BARNETT RUBIN: Oh, yes.
Well, the United States has had
experiences
where, when they have given
advance notice
to Pakistan about a
counterterrorism action,
that somehow the target of that
action escapes.
And clearly, you know, of course
there are
lots of Afghans in Pakistan and
some of them
have Pakistani passports. But it
certainly
strains credulity to believe
that a very effective
intelligence service, such as
Pakistan has,
wouldn't be aware of the
location of the leader
of Afghan Taliban, who
apparently not only
went to Iran, but flew 18 times
out of the
international airport at
Karachi, according
to the stamps in his passport.
So, clearly, since he was
clearly under their
protection, and they also
provided security
for him to be elected and for
him to hold
large gatherings last summer to
try to build
support for himself, and as they
even told
us that they were trying to make
sure he could
consolidate power, they
certainly didn't want
to give them advance warning
that they were
going to make this attack.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Barnett Rubin,
Riaz Mohammad Khan, thank you
both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to
politics and the
battle for the Democratic Party
nomination.
Senator Bernie Sanders is
pushing hard in
California, the state with the
most Democratic
delegates up for grabs.
At a rally today in Los Angeles,
he slammed
both Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump for
their big donors.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Secretary Clinton has several
super PACs,
and one of her largest super
PACs have received
many millions of dollars from
Wall Street.
(BOOING)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Now, there
is -- with
regards to Trump, this is really
hysterically
funny.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Trump is a
multibillionaire,
or so he tells us. We don't know
if it's true
or not.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: You know,
he lies every
day, so probably he's broke. I
don't know.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
addressed the
labor base of the party,
speaking at the Service
Employees International Union
Convention in
Detroit today. She also made a
nod to campaign
finance and pivoted to Trump.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We are coming to the end of the
Democratic
primaries. I applaud Senator
Sanders and his
supporters for challenging us.
We are going
to get unaccountable money out
of politics.
We are going to take on the
crisis of income
inequality. And we are going to
unify the
Democratic Party and stop Donald
Trump.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to Politics
Monday with Tamara Keith of NPR
and Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
And welcome to you both this
Monday.
So, Tamara, this contest -- we
just heard
Hillary Clinton talking about
Trump, but Bernie
Sanders is still talking about
her. Where
does this race stand? Over the
weekend, he
said to the effect, I need to be
in this race
because we don't want people
voting against
-- voting for the lesser of two
evils, which
didn't sound like the greatest
endorsement
of Hillary Clinton.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
he is definitely not ready to
endorse Hillary
Clinton at this point.
And his supporters are very much
still interested
in seeing this play out. They
don't want a
choice between Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton
if they can avoid it.
Mathematically, we should
say, it's almost certain, unless
something
dramatic happens, that Hillary
Clinton will
be the Democratic nominee.
That's why she moving on. She
has hired staff
in like -- something like nearly
a dozen swing
states. I talked to one Sanders'
supporter,
though, this -- who was in
Albuquerque at
a rally. He said, if he had to
choose between
Donald Trump and Satan himself,
he wouldn't
vote for Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh.
TAMARA KEITH: Which is to say
that he will
vote for Hillary Clinton, but he
won't be
happy about it. And I heard a
lot of that
from Sanders supporters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That also doesn't
sound like
a ringing endorsement, but it is
a move in
her direction.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: But
that's what we're seeing in the
polls sort
of overall, which is the reason
that we have
seen the polls tightening is the
last time
we were here talking about this,
I said the
number that I was paying much
more attention
to than how many endorsements
Donald Trump
was getting from Republican
elites and officeholders
was whether or not he was
getting support
from voters on the ground,
right, the real
people who show up and vote.
And right now, we're seeing the
polls tightening
because voters are starting to
come home.
Republican voters who earlier in
April or
in March were saying, I don't
know if I can
vote for Donald Trump, now are
saying they
can vote for him.
The expectation is, we will see
the same thing
on the Democratic side. But the
other thing
we're seeing is that a majority
of voters
right now both on the Democratic
side and
the Republican side say they're
voting for
their candidate not because they
like that
candidate. It's because they
dislike the other
one so much more. It's a vote
against, rather
than a vote for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, and you're
talking about
the numbers coming together for
Donald Trump
and Hillary Clinton.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are these numbers
-- numbers
like that, Tamara, at this stage
in a campaign,
are these enduring numbers? Are
they likely
to stay?
TAMARA KEITH: It's a moment in
time. And at
this moment in time, Hillary
Clinton is fighting
on two fronts. Donald Trump is
beginning to
consolidate.
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton's
unfavorables
among Bernie Sanders supporters
are actually
rising. And so you have this
time where people
who are polled are going to say,
I don't support
Hillary Clinton.
Now, I spoke to pollster Peter
Hart earlier
today. He has a new poll out,
the NBC/Wall
Street Journal poll. He said
only about 10
percent of Sanders supporters
said they would
eventually support a Republican
or consider
supporting a Republican, which
means once
-- this will shake out some.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's my
question, Amy.
Again, we're at May in the
campaign. We have
got six months to go.
With high -- we call them high
unfavorables
at this point, so high for
Hillary Clinton
and for Donald Trump, are these
numbers, are
they likely to give as people...
AMY WALTER: That's the real
question, because
we have never had in the history
of these
polls -- Peter Hart has been
doing the Wall
Street Journal/NBC poll for a
along time.
He's never seen -- the Wall
Street Journal
the polls has never seen this.
The ABC/Washington
Post poll has never seen two
candidates for
president of the United States
as unpopular
as these two candidates. So
we're in uncharted
territory.
We normally say, if you're a
really well-known
candidate and you have very high
unfavorables,
it's not likely that people are
going to change
their perception of you between
now and the
election.
But you have two really, highly
disliked people
who are eventually going to be
the nominees,
and you are going to have to
pick one of them.
So how voters get to that place
is going to
be interesting to watch for the
next six months.
A lot of people have sort of
resigned themselves
to who they're voting for. Like
Tamara pointed
out, some of them are saying,
well, it's the
lesser of two evils, but maybe
they get there
or maybe they stay home. That's
the thing
that is going to be harder to
track.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes. I saw where
someone working
for Trump was saying what
Hillary Clinton
is going to have to do because
of her high
unfavorables is -- quote -- "to
destroy Donald
Trump."
But it seems to me that may have
to be Donald
Trump's strategy as well.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, there might
be some mutual
destruction that goes on. And
you have to
wonder who is going to show up
and vote.
And it may be that this is an
election where
the negativity is what motivates
people, rather
than the joy of pulling the
lever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do we --
let's come back
to the Hillary Clinton-Bernie
Sanders situation,
Amy, because you heard Hillary
today. We heard
the comments she made about
Donald Trump,
but she was fairly positive
about Bernie Sanders.
She said, I applaud Senator
Sanders for challenging
us. We're going to get, she
said, an accountable
-- we're going to get
unaccountable money
out of politics. We're going to
take on the
crisis of income inequality.
So, she is talking about his
issues. He, meanwhile,
is still criticizing her.
AMY WALTER: Right.
She is, as Tamara pointed out,
fighting this
two-front war. She can't go on
the attack
for Bernie Sanders. You're going
to see, she
barely mentions him. It's all
Trump all the
time.
The super PACs that Bernie
Sanders talks about
supporting her, they're not
going after Bernie
Sanders. They're going after
Donald Trump
as well. And so the real
question is going
to be post this primary process
in June, not
only what does Bernie Sanders
do, but will
the biggest spokesperson for the
Democratic
Party, President Obama, come out
and start
to try to make that unification?
That, I think, is something
you're likely
to see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
point out that
Sanders himself and the people
around him
have begun to say that his main
priority is
defeating Donald Trump in the
fall, so if
he's not the nominee.
But we did learn today, Tamara,
that they
have named the members of the
platform committee
at the convention. This is where
they will
be talking about what the
Democratic Party
believes in. And there are a
number of Bernie
Sanders supporters on that
committee.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And I think
this is a really
important thing.
Sanders' campaign put out a
statement saying
they were happy that this had
happened. The
Clinton campaign put a statement
saying, this
is great. What is happening here
is Bernie
Sanders in a way is figuring out
how to land
the plane. And he is going to --
he clearly
wants to make an impact on this
party platform
and to be able to use that to
say, look, look
at what this movement has
accomplished.
The other thing he did in the
last 48 hours
is, he endorsed Tim Canova, who
is a candidate
for Congress running against
Debbie Wasserman
Schultz, the DNC chairman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The chairman.
TAMARA KEITH: And he did a
fund-raising e-mail.
It was a money bomb for Canova.
And Sanders, we believe, is
going to start
doing this for other down-ballot
candidates,
which is part of making this
about more than
just nominating Bernie Sanders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that may not
earned the
friendship forever of the chair
of the...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: No, of the chair of
the DNC.
And the offer to -- just imagine
what this
-- for both sides what these
conventions are
going to look like. You have
Paul Ryan, who
chairs the Republican
Convention, who has
not yet endorsed Donald Trump,
who may have
to preside over a convention
that he's not
supporting the front-runner.
And you have the DNC chairwoman
in a fight
with the person who's not the
nominee, but
will certainly a role to play in
this process,
which goes to show again that
this has been
a roiling of the two parties.
It's obviously
much more significant on the
Republican side,
but I think, at the end of the
day, this is
just the beginning of what we're
seeing as
either major or minor breaks in
the two parties
and their makeups.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it may be
true to say that
the likes of which we have never
seen before,
and that will continue to be
case.
AMY WALTER: That's very true,
because, every
week, we're going to say that,
every week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith, thank
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
children
who fled Vietnam return to mixed
reception;
a different kind of desperate
journey, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant's
personal story
of mental illness.
MALCOLM BRABANT: I was taken
into a secure
locked-up ward, because I had
gone mad.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But, first, we
return to
Baltimore and the not-guilty
verdict for a
police officer charged in the
death of Freddie
Gray.
Debbie Hines was in the
courtroom today. She's
a former Baltimore prosecutor
who currently
practices law in Washington.
Thanks for joining us.
Tell us first, I guess, what was
the mood
in the courtroom?
DEBBIE HINES, Former Baltimore
Prosecutor:
Well, they made very clear
before the judge
even came out that there wasn't
to be any
shouting, any emotions, and if
you didn't
think you could contain your
emotions inside
the courtroom, then you needed
to leave before
the judge came out. So there
wasn't really
any response inside a completely
packed courtroom.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. What about
Nero himself?
What about the officer when he
heard the verdict?
DEBBIE HINES: I couldn't see his
expression
because he's from the back. I'm
looking at
him from the back, as all the
spectators in
the courtroom are.
But there still wasn't any
emotion there.
And you have to understand that
the judge
read about 20 minutes. It's not
just as it
comes out in a jury verdict
where it's not
guilty, not guilty, not guilty.
He actually
read a very long legal opinion
describing
each and every of the four
counts and how
he came to his conclusion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, this is
also in this
specific individual case, right?
This isn't
an automatic hall pass for all
the officers.
We already had one end up in a
hung jury,
and now we're just talking about
officer number
two in this situation.
DEBBIE HINES: Exactly. And that
was one of
the things that Judge Barry
Williams made
very clear when he went over
methodically
all the facts and the evidence
that had been
presented, that he actually said
it might
have been different when we get
to the cases
of Officer Miller and actually
the case of
the van driver, who, throughout
the course
of both trials, Officer Porter,
as well as
Officer Nero, everybody seemed
to be putting
a lot of blame on the van driver
for the criminal
actions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about the
decision
here by Officer Nero to choose a
bench trial
instead of a jury trial?
DEBBIE HINES: I was reading his
lawyer's account
of that.
And that, I think, was a superb
decision in
this case and in this case only.
There is
always a risk, because,
generally -- I do
some criminal defense, and,
generally, you
want to have 12 people decide
your fate, more
than just one person.
But a lot of the issues that are
surrounding
Officer Nero, they really
evolved around legal
issues and his facts as they fit
into the
legal issues and that's where
the burden of
proof comes in. And so I think
that his attorneys
felt that his best shot was with
having a
bench trial and a judge who
could look at
the facts on the one hand, look
at the elements
of the law on the other hand,
and make sure
that they fit together, without
showing any
emotions as what would be likely
or might
be likely with a jury.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right,
especially with a
jury this kind of a heated
climate. Maybe
they might want to find him
guilty of something
before they let him out.
DEBBIE HINES: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
how does the
state prove that officers knew
about the rules
on how to belt down someone who
was under
arrest?
It seems some of this case
depends on whether
or not somebody opened an
e-mail.
DEBBIE HINES: Well, it's that.
And then when I was looking over
the written
opinion from Judge Williams, he
also went
through a lot of discussing the
van driver.
And a lot of the regulations go
to actually
the van driver's responsibility
and his duty.
And then there were the other
officers that
were involved. One was a
lieutenant and their
supervising officers.
And so I think a lot of his
decision in this
case weighed heavily on Officer
Nero was only
a two-year, if you want to call
a veteran
-- he was a rookie. He's only
been on the
force for two years. And so, in
this case,
the facts are very
fact-specific. There was
an e-mail that went out several
days before
Freddie Gray's arrest that
basically that
you have to seat-belt. It's a
mandatory seat-belting
any detainees.
And he was off that day. So it's
not even
clear if he actually read it
because he's
off that day. He's not there and
there was
no evidence that it was
presented in any role
call.
But I think the facts are very
specific, and
the judge wanted to point that
out, as to
what the awareness was with
respect to Officer
Nero in his case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
then we have
got four more officers. This
is...
(CROSSTALK)
DEBBIE HINES: Or really five,
because they're
going to retry Porter.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five, right.
That's right.
So, this is a very long -- give
us the timeline.
What's kind of the next step
now?
DEBBIE HINES: OK.
So, the next step -- and this is
really, really
the biggest one. That's going to
be Officer
Caesar Goodson. And he is the
van driver,
and his trial is June 6. And he
is the most
culpable.
I think, whether you're defense
or you're
the prosecution, he's the most
culpable of
all. And then the other officers
that are
staged after that, the trials
are leading
up all the way to September if
all of them
are tried.
But I think what happened with
Officer Goodson,
who is the most culpable by even
his fellow
officers, I think that that's
going to make
the determination of what
happens ultimately
in the other cases.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Debbie Hines,
thanks so much.
DEBBIE HINES: Thank you for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
Vietnam.
Relations between the United
States and its
former enemy have warmed since
the end of
the war more than 40 years ago.
Now some Vietnamese
who fled as children and became
Americans
have begun to go back. And the
country they
find is one transformed.
From Ho Chi Minh City, special
correspondent
Mike Cerre reports.
HENRY NGUYEN, IDG Ventures
Vietnam: We got
one of those calls early one
morning from
a friend who contacted the
embassy. He said,
the embassy car is coming, pack
the family
into the car, only have one bag,
and get ready
to go.
QUYNH PHAM, Art Gallery Owner:
My mother told
me one story of how the Vietcong
were coming
after us and we had to just lie
down and feign
death basically. She told me
that she covered
all of us in other people's
blood.
COL. TUAN T. TON, U.S. Army: If
I look back,
that's probably one of the most
dangerous
parts of my life, because we see
death every
second we're on that boat. My
job was just
scoop the water out all day
long. And it was
the fifth day, and I start
passing out, because
I didn't eat for five days.
MIKE CERRE: An estimated
million-and-a-half
Vietnamese have migrated to the
United States
since the end of the war, often
at great personal
and professional sacrifice. But
for most first-generation
Vietnamese-Americans there is
little interest
in coming back, save to visit
relatives.
But for a younger generation of
Vietnamese-Americans
who have little reference to
either the war
or the communist takeover, the
draw of the
new economy and the old culture
is creating
a reverse diaspora.
HENRY NGUYEN: I wouldn't say my
parents were
jumping for joy when they heard
that I was
interested in spending more time
in Vietnam.
MIKE CERRE: After fleeing
Vietnam with his
family when he was 2, Henry
Nguyen's parents
worked multiple and often menial
jobs as refugees
in Northern Virginia in pursuit
of the American
dream for their children.
Playing in rock bands and
working at McDonald's,
Henry's came true by going to
Harvard and
earning his medical degree and
MBA at Northwestern.
But, Henry, growing up in
Fairfax, Virginia,
you actually worked in a
McDonald's?
HENRY NGUYEN: Yes. Yes.
MIKE CERRE: Really?
HENRY NGUYEN: Just part-time one
summer. Like,
it's like every kid's first
summer job, right?
WOMAN: Welcome to McDonald's
Vietnam.
MIKE CERRE: Since moving back to
Vietnam full-time
12 years ago, he's now an owner
of the first
McDonald's in Vietnam, the local
pro basketball
team, and runs one of the
country's largest
venture capital funds as a V.C.,
an ironic
twist on wartime shorthand for
the Vietcong
guerrillas, which overthrew his
South Vietnam
homeland.
HENRY NGUYEN: Yes, but I want to
make sure
people understand that means
venture capitalist.
And, in some ways, it's funny
because even
here you could argue that
capitalism, because
of socialist ideology, was kind
of a dirty
word.
But, fundamentally, I think, if
you really
look at the underlying kind of
culture and
drive of people here, like, it's
always been
very market-oriented anyway.
MIKE CERRE: Henry's initial
motivation for
coming back was to better
understand the Vietnamese
culture he largely ignored while
growing up
in America. He's now married to
the daughter
of a former prime minister and
raising his
family here.
What keeps him here are the
professional challenges
and opportunities in the new
Vietnam.
HENRY NGUYEN: There's so many
ways to really
make a contribution, to make the
life of people
here in Vietnam better, to make
the country
better in terms of accelerating
its development,
and whether it's the economy,
whether it's
society, et cetera.
QUYNH PHAM: I can totally see
the influence
like from Hopper.
My mother, who I am very close
to, she actually
flat-out told me that I'm no
longer her daughter
if I come back to Vietnam. She
has a different
history from me. And I totally
realize that
she couldn't fathom then her
daughter, who
she risked everything for.
We fled this nation, and for me,
as this conscious
adult, to say, OK, wait a
minute, I'm going
to go back to this country that
we fled from
-- I was really curious, and
that was the
reason why I came back to
Vietnam.
MIKE CERRE: Quynh Pham left a
comfortable
and prestigious job at an art
institute in
California to start a gallery of
her own here
in Ho Chi Minh City.
QUYNH PHAM: This is a developing
nation, and
there aren't many contemporary
art galleries
that work at this level in the
country.
MIKE CERRE: She believes the
vibrant contemporary
art scene is a reflection of
Vietnam's creative
renaissance, as well as its
economic emergence
from nearly a century of
colonization, war
and unification.
COL. TUAN T. TON: My father was
a major in
the South Vietnamese army and my
wife's father
was a colonel in the Vietnamese
air force.
MIKE CERRE: Tuan T. Ton is a
colonel in the
United States Army. He moved
back to Vietnam
as the American defense attache,
the U.S.
military's chief representative
for our new
defense agreements with the
Vietnamese, to
counter China's expansion
efforts in the South
China Sea.
COL. TUAN T. TON: When I left
Vietnam, I never
thought I would return here,
because the image
that imprint in my head was so
deep, I pretty
much looking forward to what
America had to
offer. And America definitely
had offered
a lot.
And not until a few years ago,
when I started
working on Vietnam issue from
Washington,
D.C., I realize that it's an
opportunity for
me to serve here in my new
capacity.
MIKE CERRE: He and his
Vietnamese-American
wife, Thu-Ha, live in this
four-story villa
the U.S. maintains for its
defense attaches.
This is pretty nice living for
army living.
THU-HA TON, Wife of Col. Tuan T.
Ton: Yes.
Pretty nice, the best we have
ever lived in.
MIKE CERRE: The best you ever
live in the
Army, obviously, over here.
COL. TUAN T. TON: Yes, because
we host a lot
of foreign guests here.
MIKE CERRE: Many of them
recognize the South
Vietnamese military insignias of
their parents'
former units.
COL. TUAN T. TON: I display that
proudly.
My Vietnamese counterparts see
it. Here, it's
only American. And we just talk
about history.
MIKE CERRE: It has taken some
time for the
local Vietnamese to fully
embrace the returning
Viet Kieus, as the
Vietnamese-Americans are
known here.
After nearly 40 years of tough
economic times
and living conditions since the
war, the local
Vietnamese are just now enjoying
the benefits
of peace and prosperity.
COL. TUAN T. TON: I think people
deserve it.
There's hardworking people here.
QUYNH PHAM: It's just unreal.
I mean, when I first came back
to Vietnam,
Viet Kieu was -- it was a
derogatory term.
So, Viet Kieu are considered
people who left
Vietnam. But it's changed, this
perception
of who Viet Kieus are, because
the government
here, the people here see that
we have been
educated abroad. We have a more
international,
more global vision.
We are able to bring these
resources, these
networks, this knowledge into
this country.
And they see that it's
contributing to economic
growth, and so there's much more
support for
what everybody is doing.
HENRY NGUYEN: So many people
from Vietnam
now travel extensively. And,
reciprocally,
there's so much more economic
activity, so
much many more people, whether
it's of Vietnamese
origin or whether who are not of
Vietnamese
origin, have come to Vietnam and
done business.
And this country has changed
dramatically,
socially, politically,
economically, you name
it.
QUYNH PHAM: Having certain
freedoms in the
U.S. and then coming back here
and perhaps
feeling a little bit more
restricted, I don't
really feel we're being
hindered. I'm just
very aware. And, at times, to be
honest, I'm
cautious. You have got this old
communist
ideology, but yet we have really
embraced
capitalism here.
MIKE CERRE: As much as he enjoys
living and
working here, there's no
confusion in Colonel
Ton's mind over who he is.
COL. TUAN T. TON: I'm an
American officer.
There's no such thing as
Vietnamese-American
officer. It's only an American
officer. Over
two-thirds of my life have been
grown up in
the United States. I served in
the United
States military. It's where I
belong.
HENRY NGUYEN: I feel like my
experience is
not uncommon, in the sense of, I
may have
grown up in a time when I felt
very isolated
or separated from that identity,
but now that
I have lived here, wow, there is
something
special that we can be a part
of, and this
is still our country.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS
NewsHour," Mike Cerre
in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Over the weekend,
the "NewsHour"
was proud to accept the George
Foster Peabody
Award, the highest in broadcast
journalism,
for our coverage of the refugee
crisis in
the Middle East and Europe, a
series we have
called Desperate Journey.
Since he began covering those
stories last
summer, special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant
has brought us into the lives of
people fleeing
war and terror, often at
unimaginable personal
risk, as they sought new homes
in Europe.
The stories were the work of a
team of correspondents
and producers here, but none so
important
as Malcolm himself, who accepted
the award
on the program's behalf.
Because he's based overseas, few
of us here
at the "NewsHour" had ever even
met Malcolm
in person, until today.
So, I'm particularly happy to
have him join
me now.
And it is so wonderful to have
you here, Malcolm.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
congratulations.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thanks a lot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you first
started reporting
for us just about a year ago.
You were in
Europe in the very beginnings of
this refugee
-- it was then a problem in
Europe. You did
some reporting for Greece, but
you went on
to cover this story in all of
its dimensions.
Malcolm, did you have any idea
in the beginning
just what it was going to
become?
MALCOLM BRABANT: I certainly had
no idea it
was going to be as enormous as
this.
When I started reporting from
Greece, most
of the refugees were coming to a
holiday island
called Kos. But I heard about
that this nearby
island about six hours' journey
away by boat,
it was called Lesbos, was
starting to receive
people.
And so I went up there. And I
had heard that
there was this strange
Englishman called Eric
Kempson who was looking out for
the boats
and who was helping refugees on
the beaches.
And he was my guide to start
with.
And we have this most
extraordinary morning,
when we saw a boat in the
distance, and we
had to drive like crazy about
100 kilometers,
70 miles an hour, through Greek
lanes to get
to the beach in time, as this
rubber raft
arrived.
And it was biblical almost. It
was like something
out of Exodus, seeing these
people swarming
onto the beaches just not
knowing what they
were going to expect. And the
joy on their
faces was unbelievable. And what
was extraordinary
was seeing the reaction of some
of the Greeks
who were there, because these
are a people,
the Greeks, who have also
experienced what
it's like to flee from war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And it was very
heartwarming
to see them sort of carrying out
what they
call philoxenia, which is
unconditional kindness
and welcomes to strangers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this was at a
moment when
Greece had been through its own
terrible financial
crisis. People were in a -- many
people didn't
know where their next --
literally where their
next meal was coming from, and
yet they were
welcoming these refugees.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes, because
that's in their
nature, because they understand
what it's
like to run away from war.
They have been refugees. They
have had to
migrate to make living in
countries -- in
places like New York, in
Toronto, you have
got all these great Greek
communities, and
they know what it's like. And so
they're very
sympathetic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you watched
it, Malcolm.
You covered it in Greece. You
covered it across
Europe. And you saw attitudes
change.
Originally, the Europeans were
welcoming,
but then the fears of terrorism
grew, and
you saw a shift.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes.
And I think that people were
just simply overwhelmed
by the numbers, and I think that
there are
some countries in Europe that
resented Germany
and Sweden, for example, for
opening the -- for
saying that basically everybody
was welcome.
And I think perhaps, if Germany
and Sweden
hadn't done that, then there
might have been
maybe a better welcome for some
of these refugees.
But taking in a million may not
seem a lot
in a continent of 500 million
people. But
the impact on nations like
Sweden, for example,
which is close to my home in
Denmark, it's
really been quite enormous.
And they are really struggling
to accommodate
the 160,000 people that they're
taking in,
because you have to provide
schooling, you
have to provide housing. And
there is some
trouble in some of these asylum
centers, too.
The police, for example, say
that they're
on their knees. And that's one
of the reasons
why there has been this
backlash.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the fears of
terrorism
are real in many instances,
aren't they?
MALCOLM BRABANT: The numbers of
people who
have come with bad intent are
probably minuscule.
And I think the vetting process
is now sort
of much -- is in place, but in
the initial
waves, Europe didn't really know
who was coming
in. And so perhaps amongst all
these millions
of -- a million people who came
in, there
might be maybe hundreds of bad
guys. Who can
tell?
But it is the fear that it's
actually generating
this big reaction and a fear of
Islam as well,
in many countries, especially
Christian ones,
which are predominantly
Christian like Poland,
Hungary, and also Slovakia, for
example.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're
certainly still
watching it unfold. we don't
know what's going
to happen with the many people
who are still
kind of in limbo who haven't
been -- who haven't
found a home yet.
But I want to ask you for a
minute, Malcolm,
about your own personal story,
because it
wasn't so very long ago you were
working for
the British Broadcasting
Corporation. You
were reporting from abroad for
them. In fact,
you were here in the U.S. for a
while.
You had your own personal
crisis, and you
wrote a book about it. But
that's another
extraordinary story.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Well, it's --
this is a wonderful
sort of comeback for me, in a
way, because
I thought that my career was
finished. I thought
it was completely over, because
exactly five
years to the day that we picked
up the award
on Saturday was the day I
entered an insane
asylum.
I was taken into a secure,
locked-up ward
because I had gone mad. A few
days earlier,
I had taken -- I had been given
a drug called
Stamaril, which is -- it's a
yellow fever
vaccine made by a company called
Sanofi Pasteur.
And it fried my brain. I was --
I was in a
-- I had a really high fever for
about 13
days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Supposed to be a
yellow fever
vaccine. Right.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes, it is.
And it's supposed to protect
you. But it devastated
my brain. And it fried my brain,
literally,
affected the balance of it, and
sent me mad.
And I spent in total about a
year-and-a-half
in institutions, in locked-up
wards, and because
I went through various sort of
times when
I thought I was Christ, I
thought I was the
devil.
I even thought that I was a
suicide bomber.
And, eventually, the drugs and
the care and
the wonderful techniques of the
Danish doctors
managed to bring me back. And,
eventually,
I managed to purge myself of all
the chemicals,
basically.
And I was finally given an
all-clear about
two-and-a-half years ago. And I
haven't had
a pill since. I haven't had to
go see a psychiatrist
since. And I'm back perhaps even
stronger
than I was before, because it
didn't kill
me. And it almost did kill me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you told us
that it gave
you a much better understanding
of what those
who are mentally ill may have to
go through.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Absolutely.
I hope that it -- that this acts
for some
sort of inspiration for people
who are stigmatized
because of mental illness,
because that happens.
But -- and I'm very grateful to
the "NewsHour"
for giving me this immense
opportunity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Malcolm,
we're exceedingly
grateful to you. And we wish you
the best
and look forward to your
reporting.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thank you very
much, indeed.
Thanks. I'm grateful to you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Later tonight
on PBS, "POV"
will air "The Return," a
documentary that
tracks some of the highs and
lows experienced
by convicts returning to life on
the outside
after California relaxed its
three-strikes
sentencing guidelines.
Here's a look at the story of a
daughter as
she anticipates the approaching
reunion with
her father just released from a
years-long
prison term.
WOMAN: I hadn't heard my dad's
voice in years.
Like, the way he sounds, I don't
know even
if I remember.
When I was a teenager, I used to
calculate
the years, like, life in how
long is that?
Is he going to die in there?
Kai (ph), is nobody outside yet?
They drive
slow. Kai, who is that? Oh, my
stomach hurts.
Kai (ph), is nobody outside yet?
They drive
slow. Kai, who is that? Oh, my
stomach hurts.
MAN: Hello. Hi. How you doing?
HARI SREENIVASAN: "POV" airs
tonight on most
PBS stations. Check your local
listings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: One writer relies on her
poetry to cope
with her husband's cancer
treatment. Meanwhile,
her husband writes poems from
his own perspective.
You can hear her read one of her
poems on
our home page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org.NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Tuesday: For this week's
story in our Making
the Grade series, we travel to
Vermont, where
declining student enrollment has
forced schools
to merge in order to survive.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.